Selecting
=========

``Amiss\Sql\Manager`` has three methods for retrieving objects: ``getById``, ``get`` and ``getList``.
Both methods share the same set of signatures, and they can both be used in a number of different
ways. The first argument is always the model name. All the subsequent arguments are used to define
criteria for the query.

The selection methods are:

.. py:method:: Amiss\\Sql\\Manager::getById( $model , $primaryKeyValue )

    Retrieve a single instance of ``$model`` represented by ``$primaryKeyValue``:

    .. code-block:: php
        
        <?php
        $event = $manager->getById('Event', 5);
    
    If the primary key is a multi-column primary key, you can pass an array containing the values in
    the same order as the metadata defines the primary key's properties:

    .. code-block:: php
    
        <?php
        $eventArtist = $manager->getById('EventArtist', array(2, 3));
    
    If you find the above example to be a bit unreadable, you can use the property names as keys:

    .. code-block:: php
    
        <?php
        $eventArtist = $manager->getById('EventArtist', array('eventId'=>2, 'artistId'=>3));


.. py:method:: object Amiss\\Sql\\Manager::get( $model , $criteria... )

    Retrieve a single instance of ``$model``, determined by ``$criteria``. This will throw an
    exception if the criteria you specify fails to limit the result to a single object.

    .. code-block:: php

        <?php
        $event = $manager->get('Venue', '{venueSlug}=?', $slug);

    See :ref:`clauses` and :ref:`criteria-arguments` for more details.


.. py:method:: array Amiss\\Sql\\Manager::getList( $mode , $criteria... )

    Retrieve a list of instances of ``$model``, determined by ``$criteria``. Exactly the same as
    ``get``, but allows you to find many objects and will always return an array.


.. _clauses:

Clauses
-------

This represents the ``where`` part of your query.

Most ``where`` clauses in Amiss can be written by hand in the underlying DB server's dialect. This
allows complex expressions with an identical amount of flexibility to using raw SQL - because it
*is* raw SQL.

All ``Amiss\Sql\Manager->get...()`` methods can accept clauses as part of their criteria. When
passing a clause as a string, you can pass it using the underlying table's column names:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    // The Artist class has a property called 'artistTypeId' that maps to a 
    // column with the same name:
    $artists = $manager->getList('Artist', 'artistTypeId=?', 1);


When your table's column names are exactly the same as your property names, this is the way you
should do it - there's no sense in making Amiss do more work than it needs to - but when your column
names are different, Amiss will perform a simple token replacement on your clause, converting
``{propertyName}`` into the ``column_name`` from the underlying metadata:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    // The Venue class has a property called 'venueName' that maps to a column
    // called 'venue_name'
    $venue = $manager->get('Venue', '{venueName}=?', 'foo');

In the above example, ``{venueName}`` is replaced with the field ``venue_name``, resulting in the
following query::

    SELECT * FROM venue WHERE venue_name='foo'


You can also pass an array of values indexed by property name for the where clause if you are using
an ``Amiss\Sql\Criteria\Query`` (or a criteria array). This type of clause will perform field
mapping without the need for curly braces. Multiple key/value pairs in the 'where' array are treated
as an ``AND`` query:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $venues = $manager->getList(
        'Venue',
        array('where'=>array('venueName'=>'Foo', 'venueSlug'=>'foo'))
    );
    // WHERE venue_name='Foo' AND venue_slug='foo'


.. _criteria-arguments:

Criteria Arguments
------------------

Several methods throughout this documentation take a dynamic argument list referred to as
``$criteria...``. This is always accepted at the end of the argument list and can be passed in a
number of different formats. The ``get()`` and ``getList()`` methods of ``Amiss\Sql\Manager`` take
their criteria after the the ``$modelName`` argument, whereas ``getRelated()`` takes it after both
the ``$modelName`` and the ``$relationName`` arguments.

Please also familiarise yourself with the section on :ref:`clauses` before diving in.


Shorthand
~~~~~~~~~

The "where" clause and parameters can be passed using a shorthand format that consists of a SQL
expression with positional PDO-style placeholders (question marks) and each corresponding value in
subsequent arguments::

    ( $criteria... ) == ( string $positionalWhere, scalar $param1 [, scalar $param2... ] )

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $badNews = $manager->get('Event', 'name=? AND slug=?', 'Bad News', 'bad-news-2');
    $bands = $manager->getList('Artist', 'artistTypeId=1');


To select using named placeholders, pass the where clause as the first criteria argument and an
array of parameters the next argument::

    ( $criteria... ) == ( string $namedWhere, array $params )

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $duke = $manager->get('Artist', 'slug=:slug', array(':slug'=>'duke-nukem'));


Long form
~~~~~~~~~

The long form of query criteria is either an array representation of the relevant
``Amiss\Sql\Criteria\\Query`` derivative, or an actual instance thereof::

    ( $criteria... ) == ( array $criteria )
    ( $criteria... ) == ( Amiss\Sql\Criteria\Query $criteria )


.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $artist = $manager->get(
        'Artist', 
        array(
            'where'=>'slug=:slug', 
            'params'=>array(':slug'=>'duke-nukem')
        )
    );

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $criteria = new Amiss\Sql\Criteria\Select;
    $criteria->where = 'slug=:slug';
    $criteria->params[':slug'] = 'duke-nukem';
    
    $artist = $manager->get('Artist', $criteria);


Lists
-----

The ``getList()`` method will return every row in the Artist table if no criteria are passed (be
careful!):

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $artists = $manager->getList('Artist');


In addition to the "where" clause and parameters, ``getList()`` will also make use of additional
criteria:


Pagination
~~~~~~~~~~

Amiss provides two ways to perform pagination. The first is the standard LIMIT/OFFSET combo:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    // limit to 30 rows
    $artists = $manager->getList('Artist', array('limit'=>30);

    // limit to 30 rows, skip 60
    $artists = $manager->getList('Artist', array('limit'=>30, 'offset'=>60));


The second style is suited to the way your UI typically thinks of pagination: using page number/page
size. This is passed as a :term:`2-tuple` using the ``page`` key:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    // retrieve page 1, page size 30. equivalent to LIMIT 30
    $artists = $manager->getList('Artist', array('page'=>array(1, 30)));

    // retrieve page 3, page size 30. equivalent to LIMIT 30, OFFSET 60
    $artists = $manager->getList('Artist', array('page'=>array(3, 30)));


Ordering
~~~~~~~~

There are several different ways to order your results. 

You can order ascending on a single column with the following shorthand. Fields will be mapped using
this method:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $eventArtists = $manager->getList('EventArtist', array('order'=>'priority'));


Just like :ref:`clauses`, you can order using an array. The key should be the field name, which
*will* be mapped in this case, and the value should be the order direction. The default order
direction is ascending, so if you wish to sort ascending you can either specify 'asc' directly, or
just omit the key and pass the field name as the value.

This will produce the same order as the previous example:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $eventArtists = $manager->getList('EventArtist', array(
        'order'=>array(
            'priority'=>'desc',
            'sequence',
        ),
    ));


And also like :ref:`clauses`, you can write your order expression in raw sql. You can use column
names directly, or you can use property name placeholders:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $eventArtists = $manager->getList('EventArtist', array(
        'order'=>'{propertyName} desc, column_name',
    ));


Counting
--------

You can use all of the same signatures that you use for ``Amiss\Sql\Manager->get()`` to count rows:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    // positional parameters
    $dukeCount = $manager->count('Artist', 'slug=?', 'duke-nukem');

    // named parameters, shorthand:
    $dukeCount = $manager->count('Artist', 'slug=:slug', array(':slug'=>'duke-nukem'));

    // long form
    $criteria = new \Amiss\Sql\Criteria\Query();
    $criteria->where = 'slug=:slug';
    $criteria->params = array(':slug'=>'duke-nukem');
    $dukeCount = $manager->count('Artist', $criteria);


"In" Clauses
------------

Vanilla PDO statements with parameters don't work with arrays and IN clauses:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    // This won't work.
    $pdo = new PDO(...);
    $stmt = $pdo->prepare("SELECT * FROM bar WHERE foo IN (:foo)");
    $stmt->bindValue(':foo', array(1, 2, 3));
    $stmt->execute(); 


Amiss handles unrolling non-nested array parameters:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php 
    $criteria = new Amiss\Sql\Criteria;
    $criteria->where = 'foo IN (:foo)';
    $criteria->params = array(':foo'=>array(1, 2));
    $criteria->namedParams = true;
    list ($where, $params) = $criteria->buildClause();
    
    echo $where;        // foo IN (:foo_0,:foo_1) 
    var_dump($params);  // array(':foo_0'=>1, ':foo_1'=>2)


You can use this with ``Amiss\Sql\Manager`` easily:

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    $artists = $manager->getList(
        'Artist', 
        'artistId IN (:artistIds)', 
        array(':artistIds'=>array(1, 2, 3))
    );


.. note::

    This does not work with positional parameters (question-mark style).

.. warning::

    Do not mix and match hand-interpolated query arguments and "in"-clause parameters (not that you
    should be doing this anyway). The following example may not work quite like you expect:

    .. code-block:: php

        <?php
        $criteria = new Criteria\Query;
        $criteria->params = array(
            ':foo'=>array(1, 2),
            ':bar'=>array(3, 4),
        );
        $criteria->where = 'foo IN (:foo) AND bar="hey IN(:bar)"';
        
        list ($where, $params) = $criteria->buildClause();
        echo $where;
    
    You'd be forgiven for assuming that the output would be::

        foo IN(:foo_0,:foo_1) AND bar="hey IN(:bar)"
    
    However, the output will actually be::
        
        foo IN(:foo_0,:foo_1) AND bar="hey IN(:bar_0,:bar_1)"

    This is because Amiss does no parsing of your WHERE clause. It does a fairly naive regex
    substitution that is more than adequate if you heed this warning.


Constructor Arguments
---------------------

If you are mapping an object that requires constructor arguments, you can pass them using criteria.

.. code-block:: php

    <?php
    class Foo
    {
        /** @primary */
        public $id;

        public function __construct(Bar $bar)
        {
            $this->bar = $bar;
        }
    }

    class Bar {}

    // retrieving by primary with args
    $manager->getById('Foo', 1, array(new Bar));

    // retrieving single object by criteria with args
    $manager->get('Foo', array(
        'where'=>'id=?',
        'params'=>array(1),
        'args'=>array(new Bar)
    ));

    // retrieving list by criteria with args
    $manager->getList('Foo', array(
        'args'=>array(new Bar)
    ));


.. note:: Amiss does not yet support using row values as constructor arguments.

